just the last couple of months I have
told people in a very piece by piece
step by step way that it seems that I am
now learning Japanese and I don't really
have a choice in the matter and it seems
that my future is going to be linked to
Japanese as a language of scholarship
and I don't really have a choice the
better and obviously I have not been
saying that with a lot of pride or
enthusiasm for learning Japanese because
of the circumstances that I've kind of
cornered me into this that are in large
part beyond my control but it's funny
man I mean some people are optimists and
you know if you manage to grow to
adulthood and to hold onto that optimism
I think in some ways it's beautiful
thing just two of the people have told
us to people i mentioned that yeah you
know i'm now learning japanese looks
like this is what the future is gonna be
for me to different people responded
that by saying oh are you in love are
you getting married laughs their default
assumption or explanation for this was
oh wow you know you you must have fallen
in love with japanese woman like man hey
if you made it to this age and you still
got that out to visit video yeah I'm
happy for you oh I guess that optimism
for me it disappeared a long time ago
but if you still got it I'm happy for
you man so no I'm not in love those are
not my reasons for networking Japanese
that's funnier to me that it should be I
guess look you know immediately before
coming back to Canada this time i was
living in taiwan and i was working on
chinese my reasons for he on chinese is
to be a really long video to get into it
but that too was not what i wanted to be
doing with my life one of my professors
here who actually is a Japanese guy he
asked me he said look what do you want
to do if you won the if you won the
lottery tomorrow what would you be
working on a my answer then as now was
actually first nations languages well
anyway that was my answer then I don't
know um I mean I've
when I came back from Cambodia to Canada
at that time I really made the decision
that working on first nations languages
what I wanted to do with the rest of my
life and it's needless say it's not just
a matter of language it's the politics
of the language it's the political
struggle to try to prevent these
languages from going extinct all kinds
of questions around government policy
and education and the production of new
knowledge at a very forward-looking
engagement with these languages whereas
by contrast obviously like when I was
working on an ancient language like
pally that's a lot more like working on
ancient Greek so your interest is
backward-looking you're interested in
ancient philosophy and each and history
and then a series of stages through the
medieval the colonial unto the modern
but a lot of that is ultimately
backward-looking and my interest in
first nations languages was
forward-looking it's about making a
positive difference now and for the next
generation and actually a lot of the
people around me when I was at first
nations university learning Cree and i
also had one course that stayed a little
bit of a jib way a lot of them were
surprised that because they were so
accustomed to people people who were
devoted to these languages they were so
accustom them having the historical and
backward looking emphasis they really
expected you to be for example
fascinated by reconstructing traditional
shamanism you know religious aspects of
the religion from a few centuries ago or
looking at I guess particular historical
battles from the colonial period from a
century ago or two centuries ago what
have you so when they were talking to me
a lot of them really got excited and
we're really surprised interested to
hear someone talking in this very
forward-looking way I remember I mean
like the only historical research
project I proposed had to do with the
Cold War had to do with what it was like
when you were living on a reservation in
the 1970s and 1980s and listening to the
radio and trying to figure out what was
going on in the outside world if you
were Korea or a jib way you know like if
your first languages career first
language is a jib way and you're trying
to imagine what is this the radio was
telling me about nuclear war
or in the Russians and so on and of
course again even that even though it
was historical my interest wasn't
looking forward was in talking to people
now understanding the culture and what's
going on on the reservations and in
rural Canada and in urban Canada now in
the future I just mentioned the
significance of urban canada for First
Nations is always underrated people want
to think it's happening far away but the
real geography of where minority
languages exist and where they go where
they got to struggle to survive is
always an economic geography people go
where there are employment opportunities
and so actually one of the biggest
concentrations of Cree speaking people
in Canada is in Vancouver BC not because
Cree is a native language there it isn't
if you look at a map Cree are not the
native people in Vancouver but Cree
people move to Vancouver from all over
Canada because that's where they can get
a job as they can get ahead etc so still
to this day I mean I say this partly
because even the people who know me
personally they may not get this about
me still to this day I'm trying to get
into language programs for create a jib
way still to this day a couple of weeks
ago I was planning to buy an airplane
ticket and visit one of the few
universities that still teaches a jib
way so both created GA are part of the
same language family both algonkian
languages and you know I said an email
well look the round trip cost is going
to be like two thousand five hundred
dollars so can you confirm for me that
the professor's I should be there this
during the summer break a lot of
professors are not at the University
during the summer break there were a
couple people the University were nice
to me and saying yes we want you as a
student yes you should make this trip
but they never really got back to me
confirming there would actually be
somebody there to meet me and talk to me
what got the university so I didn't do
that something else that you know
certainly there's an email trail for you
know when I first got here University of
Victoria I was beating down the doors
linguistics Department trying to work on
first nations languages here here at
uvic because you've it claims that has a
robust department of fur stations
language sorry first nations languages
and they had one temporary professor
you know a member of faculty is not a
permanent professor who is specialized
in Algonkian languages including the jib
way so i was saying them look I've
studied Cree in the past I want to study
a jib way now you've got a professor who
can do it let me at least do an
independent study course where I get
credit for studying at your boy sitting
on my desk with a stack of textbooks I
can come in and write tests I can do
everything and do it all myself give me
the opportunity to work on a jib way so
that was just couple months ago and I
said also look if any of your professors
are teaching any First Nations language
including the the west coast versed in
languages i want to know about it i want
in and I had email with a couple of the
professors who could teach those
languages in theory but none of them
actually are doing it within my lifetime
it is not possible to study any
indigenous language at the University
Victoria whatsoever despite some very
misleading hype that's on their websites
anyway but I did kick up a fuss about
that largely through email talk to go
professors face to face but even when I
got here direct off the airplane from
taiwan i was still looking for any
opportunity to work on first nations
languages because as i say not too many
years ago that was vision i made for
what i want to do with the rest of my
life now unfortunately he in practical
reality my my options to study those
languages my ability to actually study
these languages was destroyed by my wife
who is now my ex-wife so don't worry
that story as a happy ending but we got
divorced it's okay um but I was enrolled
in a language program for Cree and even
though that program was not great if
that program had not worked out if my
wife had not made the terrible decision
she made I would have proceeded to go to
a different program for Cree or for a
jib way or for some combination thereof
so that was what I wanted to be doing
with my life and if I had any choice in
the matter it's what I would be doing
now so came to university of victoria
for reasons that would make this video
too long to explain i was
working on Chinese at that time you know
what I mean to give a long story short
the basic reason why I was working on
Chinese is that my ex-wife spoke Chinese
she is not a Chinese person she's French
ethnically and in citizenship and so on
but uh for her own PhD research she
learned Chinese so basically because I
was married to her I started working on
Chinese that is simplifying the story
massively but for now we're gonna leave
to that and again there's a happy ending
to that story because that marriage ends
a divorce and it really is true that in
a completely cold and objective way at
the end of that marriage there wasn't
any reason for me to continue learning
Chinese but I did for time and I came
here to uvic to work on Chinese because
I thought well I've done so much work on
Chinese already I don't want that to go
to waste because I've already had so
much hard work on so many other
languages goes to waste it's
heartbreaking every time every time you
put years or hundreds of hours and hard
work you know you go through this
tremendous process of suffering like
waking up at 6am and working on a
language before you go to work at 8am
you know it's hard and it's dramatic in
ways that are never shown in movies it's
dramatic in a subtle way all right and
it's heartbreaking in a subtle way the
whole process okay um so I came to the
University of Victoria thinking that
Chinese was going to be my language
scholarship with the rest of my life and
I did have offers to go to graduate
school get PhDs and so on that presume
that was now going to step up and become
a son I'll just work on Chinese politics
Chinese history possibly Chinese
Buddhism a little bit because i have
this robust background relate to punish
philosophy blah blah blah it's not what
i want it what I wanted was working for
a stations languages and that's why I
say the
minute I arrived here was still looking
for that it's not what I wanted but it
seemed to be what was possible for me to
do unfortunately to make another very
long story short the Chinese language
program here at University of Victoria
was garbage and a lot of the people
involved in that program directly and
indirectly were nice to me and a lot of
them are people i personally like just
people that I talked about politics with
talked about history but even talked
about my divorce with talking to one
person alive with there were a lot of
people who I really like as individuals
who are connected that program make it
happen but right now in 2015 it's a
terrible program and it is in a state of
disarray and a lot of the people a lot
of the professors that I vote
acknowledge to me yeah this program
right now it's a bit of a disaster it's
instant disarray and I gotta tell them
you know even though many of those
conversations were friendly I got to
keep it real with these people and say
look man like I'm 35 I'm 36 whatever AJ
was we had the conversation I ain't got
five years to kill here all right I'm
not on vacation right now I'm 36 I got a
two-year-old daughter I gotta think
about getting this university degree
getting the workforce earning a living
as soon as possible yeah if this if this
institution is a disaster it's my
problem now I'm not talking about this
in the abstract like oh yeah maybe in
there 15 years this academic program
getting proved no no no no I need action
and I need it today hey I'm working hard
I'm working like my hat is on fire cuz
having come out even though like you
look at my resume look my CV luminor
I've led a fascinating life my life was
not boring living in Laos living in
Cambodia living all the rest of it but
then you come back to can at the end of
that process and you need results today
I got a look at the next one year the
next two years
no I'm not looking at a ten-year
timeline so if your institution is dis
organizers in disarray I can't help you
I came here and I'm paying thousand
dollars in tuition so you can help me
let's keep it straight so it's cool like
I had a lot of great conversations
coming out of that went through a whole
formal complaint process in dealing with
what was wrong with the Chinese language
program that went to the Dean that went
to the Ombudsman that went to Parliament
pc parliament what up total population
british columbia is less than the total
population of laos we got an elected
democracy here if you got a problem in
it's serious take it to Parliament they
want to listen three different members
of parliament her my complaint and at
least two of the three got back to me
and a couple other employees / because
it's a real problem so look man I moved
here with the only worldly possessions
I've got this blue blue tin cup pair of
shoes the very few things I own in this
world are in Victoria BC
chinese-language turns out to be a dead
end here the First Nations language
program turns out to be a mirage there
is no First Nations language programming
error despite what you'll see on the web
sites if you google through it only
option left for me is Japanese so I wish
I had a lot of optimism about the future
am i use the Japanese language the
professor's I've spoken to hear
connected Japanese again I like them as
people great people my professor for my
first semester of Japanese was talented
and hardworking and sympathetic but it's
terrible program it's terrible and when
I was talking about the problems the
program with the professor she said to
me look I can't change it I'm just the
language instructor and she said to me
you're right like what you're pointing
out that's wrong with this program
they're real problems but she said if
you don't take this complaint forward to
the head of the department to the Dean
and nothing's going to change so I was
really reluctant do that because it said
we look just a couple of months ago I
went through that process for Chinese I
don't want to go through it again now
for Japanese I don't you know I'm not
paid to do this I'm not a paid
consultant trying to improve the quality
of education here at you it but she
asked me to and I got her to write a
formal letter saying that she is a
professor asked me to do that and I did
I went and I had a meeting with the Dean
and the head of the department and we
talked about what's wrong with Japanese
program and during that meeting I said
to them straight up because again i
don't have years to burn here so look I
came here thinking you guys had your act
together thinking this would be a
world-class language program and it's
not it's a mess and I'm not here to tell
you that I'm like on the verge of giving
up that I'm considering giving up or
that I'm like losing confidence I've
lost confidence I've given up like for
me in this department it's over and I
would have already dropped out of this
program gone to another university and
started from scratch again because
you're Chinese program is garbage
japanese program is broken just say that
the only reason I'm here now is because
I asked my parents permission to leave
go to the University again and they said
no they wanted me to stay here and
finish this program so long story long
I'm leaving out a lot man this is making
a long story short but hey um look man
only reason I was studying Japanese in
the first place is because Chinese at
this university was a disaster was a
dead end
and now the only reason why I'm staying
in Japanese after that also turns out to
be a pretty lousy program because I
ain't got a choice so I'm going to
complete this diploma in Japanese and
when people talk to me now about what
I'm doing the future I gotta say hey I
am painfully open-minded I have no idea
what I'm doing after this diploma is
open and I'm considering the most
diverse options imaginable am i
considering getting a PhD yes am i
considering going straight into the
workforce yes I'm considering have you
got any ideas send me an email I think I
am open-minded to a fault so for me this
is very unusual I'm a very driven person
I'm a highly motivated person like when
I talking about getting up at 6am and
studying a language for i go to work man
I've lived that life I've lived that
life in Hong Kong when I had a
high-pressure job I've lived that life
in vientiane laos when I had a low
pressure job but I was having to get on
my bicycle and sweat out several liters
of water in order to go and buy mangoes
at the market every day you know
different kinds of pressures living in
different places but yeah man I know
what it's like I generally I've lived as
a highly focused goal oriented objective
driven person and right now I'm at a
time in my life where I have no choice
but to be the opposite of that because I
don't know what my objectives are I I
can work hard but I have no way of
knowing what it isn't working at words
so I I'm trying to find the reckless joy
in what could be considered somewhat the
present situation